They had them for so long in a department head
status.
Now, in those early days, did President Rutter or
Vice President Page give you any guidelines, any
boundaries? None. None.
How often did you meet with the other deans and the
president and the vice president?
At that time, 59 and for a few years beyond that,
there existed what was known, I think, as an
executive committee, the executive committee.
President Rutter presided. Other members were
Vice President Page, Registrar Lloyd Heaton, who
kept the minutes of that group.
Each of the four deans, academic deans, plus the
dean of students, and the vice president for
business affairs. That's one, two, three, four,
five, six, I think eight people.
Well,
they would meet, I believe, once a week over in the
Koch building.
And the agenda consisted of curricular matters
and other items which pertained to the operation
of the university. At times, there were
some
Oh, let's see how to describe this.
At times there were some unexpected agenda items,
but not frequently. And by an unexpected agenda
item, I mean something that one of the deans would
bring to the table as a as a potential problem in
that area or whatever.
President Rutter had,
President Rutter as the presiding officer of the
executive committee
had the style of discussing an issue on the agenda,
whatever it might be.
But then, before a vote was taken on it,
and after, on occasions, he had expressed his view
on the subject He would go around the table asking
each one of those present, what do you think? And
generally, you would say in a two-sentence
expression, what I think. And of course, they were
always tailored to what the chairman thinks.
I recall there was one departure to that on one
occasion. after I'd been there a few years.
And it, I think, started the group.
Let's see.
But that was the way that President Rutter
made known to the deans
what he expected
in the way of change or progress or whatever.
Incidentally, Haskell,
I don't know whether this should go into the record
or not. You want me to turn it off? Yeah. When you
first got here, who were your dean colleagues? My
closest colleague was Fred Benson in the College
of Engineering.
I did not know Patterson very well, dean of
agriculture.
And
I knew Al Price
somewhat, but not closely.
Describe Benson and his personality and his
style. Who? Fred Benson.
Fred was low-key.
Thorough. Took an engineer's.
Made an engineer's analysis about. Issues that
came up.
A stickler for truth and honesty.
Square shooter. Do you think that President
Rudder in those early, your early years here, do
you think that there were any of the deans that had
more influence with him than the others? I've just
named him Fred Benson. I think Fred and his
straightforwardness
and his business acumen and knowledge of his field
plus the recognition that Fred had among the
engineering sector in the state, commercial as
well as collegiate,
became known to Rutter, and he recognized that and
respected it. As you were trying to learn more
about A&M and your responsibilities, to whom did
you turn for input? Who were your advisors,
friends, counselors?
Haskell, I can't remember that I had one. Did you
pick up the phone and call another dean and say,
I've got a problem, what do I do? I'd call Benson
occasionally, rarely. Mm-hmm. He was the only one
I would call. On
maybe an occasion or two, I would call Wayne Hall,
but not frequently. He becomes the vice president
not long after Boyd Page leaves. Describe Wayne
Hall's style of... of administrative
leadership?
Again, low-key.
That's the best I can say of it, a low-key guy.
He was strongly loyal to President Rutter, I
think.
I've learned from him that he was Dean Hall. I have
trouble not calling him Dean Hall because when I
worked for him as assistant graduate dean, but
when I worked for Dr. Hall, I learned that he
apparently is the one when Mr. Rutter was very
unhappy about the recommendation that the name be
changed to Texas State University. Mr. Rutter
didn't like that at all. And that Hall came up with
the Texas A&M, no abbreviations, the A and the M and
the ampersand, and that he said Mr. Rutter liked
that. He wanted to hold on to the A&M title. Yeah.
With A&M not standing for anything. That's right.
That's right. I'm going to. All right. Unplug
your. Oh, I'm going to close this block. As you
became the new dean, what were your immediate
goals for arts and sciences and then your long
range goals?
No Haskell.
I don't recall having. A set of.
Goals. Either in writing or. In memory.
I I wanted to. First of all, I wanted to do a a good
job. I
felt more responsible
to the department heads and the faculty than I did
to the Koch building. And you didn't have any fires
that had to be put out? There were no immediate
problems that you had to deal with. Well, quickly.
There were. There
were. A couple of personnel matters. That
President Rudder was interested in in the School
of Arts and Sciences.
That he wanted. Changes made in. But he didn't put
undue pressure on me. To. Make those changes.
And they were made. In time. One ran its normal
course, the other. I found an opportunity where
the individual had
problems with his travel reports, and it was the
basis for requiring a change. It turned out well,
and I think, please, Mr. Rutter,
But
I
wanted to see the college grow.
I wanted to see the departments get the
recognition they deserved. One of the first
things I did from the standpoint of a study made to
help me at the budget table was to develop a
statistical analysis of the budget of A&M College
of Texas in which I showed total
number of faculty by rank, salary and average
salary by rank at each department in every college
with college-wide summaries, school summaries,
that is.
I also showed secretarial
support
in the department head's office for the
department head and the faculty. The number, the
head count number of people in service positions
to help the department head and the faculty. And of
course, here sits ag and engineering, each with
the
support
of being Agricultural and Mechanical College of
Texas, plus each with an engineering experiment
station and an extension service from which They
could borrow and change and swap out and such.
And that was, incidentally, the amount of support
for the departments in the School of Arts and
Sciences almost just dwindled into
insignificance when compared to these big guns.
I also did an analysis of travel funds,
which was just startling.
Did an analysis of
semester credit hour production, how much
teaching took place in this college by department
compared to that college by department.
That,
when I went for my hearing with President Rutter
on budget matters, and as I recall at that time the
business manager was a chap by the name of Charles,
Tom Cherry hadn't come yet. Graber or something
like that. I believe it was G-R-A-E-B, I think.
Yeah, I think so. I gave him a copy and I gave the
president a copy and I went over it page by page and
it was painful for them.
And I think that helped open the door budget-wise
for us in the
School of Arts and Sciences. We didn't make
quantum leaps by any means, but we did increase our
support both salary-wise and office help,
travel, other expenses kind of things.
Gradually, but it increased.
Among your department, I'm not going to ask the
negative now, among those department heads that
you inherited, who were your favorites?
Hard to say. Chester Clipple in mathematics. I...
thought was a great guy.
Chester
did not
take kindly at the graduate level in mathematics.
Chester did not look with great favor upon making a
strong effort to improve the graduate enrollment
in mathematics.
His department was probably the most selective of
all for graduate students. He had grown up under
the tutelage of a UT
mathematician.
Name escapes me now. who felt that you just almost
had to walk on water to be a candidate, to be a
doctoral student in mathematics, that you really
truly had to come up with an original, creative,
new mathematical construction of some kind that
just never existed before. Clipper was like that.
Now, who headed education when you arrived? When I
arrived, Grady Parker was head of education. It
was a department and business was a department. It
was a department. Business was a division. Oh,
that's right. The division of business. No
departments within the division.
And I was amused when, in a way amused, I was amused
at the rationale given for the dissolution
of the School of Arts and Sciences into a College of
Liberal Arts and a College of Science.
President Rutter said that various consultants
had looked at it and they felt that the span of
control
a good administrative word, that the span of
control was too extensive for one dean to have so
many departments, those in science and over here.
And at the same time that took place, I'd made a swap
with political, a swap with the president. I said,
well, if we're going to do this, namely reorganize
the College of the School of Arts and Sciences and
the two colleges.
I would like at least to take the Division of
Business Administration and give it
departmental status.
So in the same movement, We created as many
departments in business as we lost in science.
Span of control turned out to be the same. So arts
and sciences is divided into two parts at first.
Yes, liberal arts and science. And did the
geosciences go with science? Oceanography and
Meteorology.
Geosciences was comprised of oceanography and
meteorology out of the School of Arts and
Sciences. Geology from engineering. Geography
from, was it in agriculture at that time?
Geophysics.
or was that Department of Geology? But
geosciences came, I think, after science did,
maybe by a year, Haskell. I'm fuzzy on that. And
then later, education becomes a college, And
business becomes a college. Business becomes a
college first. Then education becomes a college
in 69. Okay. So 10 years after you. 10 years after I
got. All right, let's back up and lead me as much as
you can, lead this discussion through the century
study, the aspirations report, and all of that.
How did, as far as you know, how did that come into
being even? What, the central council? Why did we
even have a forward look? I think it came into being
as a consequence of the University of Texas study.
Because theirs was their 75th. Theirs was their
75th anniversary, wasn't it? Yes. That was the
basis for the committee of 75. and ours was the
Century Council, 100. Have to go up a little
higher, you know.
So I think that was the prime push for the
Century Council study.
President Rudder, called me over and said he'd
like for me to become the chairman of the
coordinating committee i think was its title i'm
not sure he
gave me the names of others he thought would be good
members of the committee and
the responsibility of that committee was to
Determine agenda for meetings.
Seek out and put into usable form all the data and
information which the various committees of the
Century Council. Salt. Ask for. Make it
presentable to them.
I I. I guess the word would be.
I'm not sure, the first meeting of the Century
Council, President Rutter asked me to lay out the
long scope agenda, which I did. And,
of course, it was that Century Council supported
by one other not too frequently remembered
activity
that caused the big change in military and
coeducation. And with reference to that second
one I'm speaking of, it was a study commissioned by
the Farmer Students Association to go to the high
schools of the state and In a blindfold study, A&M
not identified as the sponsor of the study. They
asked a PR firm, I think, in Houston to design and
execute the study for them. Barton Nelson was part
of that over in rural sociology. I know. But that
study, commissioned by the at President Rudder
and the board's request, commissioned by the
former students and paid for by them, went to the
high schools of Texas asking, I think, juniors or
juniors and seniors about their preferences for
colleges, why Why do you prefer this college?
I don't know whether they asked, why do you dislike
this college or not? But nonetheless, A&M came out
weakly, weak, weak, weak. Such phrases as Cal
College, no girls,
and such as that. I think that study, although it
hasn't been given the recognition publicly that
it deserves, I think that had as much influence on
the dissolution of all military and the
development of a coeducational program as
anything else. There's one other... name
associated with coeducation especially that I
have not heard at all during any of the discussions
over the years. And that's the name of a woman by the
name of Mary Ann Parker. Do you know that name? Mary
Ann Parker was the wife of
George Parker. What was his name? I knew them both.
Mary Ann, I think, was a UT grad. Her
parents, her family, I think, Parker Lumber and
Parker Esten Hardware, that Parker, affluent,
well-to-do, top of the list, O'Brien
citizenship.
Mary Ann Parker for several months raised all
kinds of stew about the admission of women to Texas
A&M University. She was in President Rutter's
hair and he,
he was not happy with her pushing. She wanted women
admitted. Oh Lord, yes. She and Bill Moore.
I don't know what prompted Mary Ann to become so
heavily involved, except that it might have been
just it was something that she thought should
happen. But she threatened lawsuits.
and in fact may have initiated a lawsuit for a while
back in the old Brown Eagle. There's quite a few
stories about Mary Ann Parker and her quest for the
admission of women. I never see her name
identified with that movement, but it was strong.
Now, I have heard a legend that when Mr. Rutter got
our committee's first set of recommendations,
recommending women, volunteer corps, that he
called the deans in and fussed at them. And did
what? And fussed at them, chewed them out. Why
didn't you all watch on the... Why don't you
control it better? There you go. Is that correct,
as you recall? I do not specifically recall such a
meeting. It could have happened. I... There are a
lot of things I don't recall, Haskell. Another
part of the myth is that Benson, the way I heard it,
Benson kind of said, well, Earl, if you didn't want
their recommendations, you sure as hell
shouldn't have asked for them. That sounds like
Benson.
Did you deans have any... Did you all have any
guesstimate of what the Century Study was going to
recommend? Were you all surprised?
Well, not really. It seemed to me to be just such an
essential It's going somewhere along the line.
It's going to take place. Why not now? After all of
this support for it and strong voices for it. And of
course there was that minority of the old diehards
who. Who resented it deeply? But. In the final
analysis. Did not submit a minority report. Did
any body try to twist your arm? No. No. At one time,
J. Harold Dunn was the chairman of the Century
Council. At one time, during a luncheon, I sat next
to Harold, and he asked me, he said, Dean Hubert, he
didn't say, do you think we ought to admit women? He
said, how do you think we should start the
admission of women?
I said, well, Mr. Dunn, there are two ways in my
mind. The first is just use the same admission
standards, but open it up.
If you're qualified, come on. The second would be a
more gradual conservative approach, and that
would be to open it up first for the first two to four
years to transfer girls, students from junior
colleges or from any other college who have at
least 60 hours of college credit come to A&M for
your degree and your upper division work.
And that was a move which I thought had some merit
from the very beginning of this study. I never did
expound it, but I felt that it had some merit. But I
did say that to Harold Dunn. He was the only one who
asked me my opinion about the... about the
coeducational thing. He was certainly for it, no
question about that. Now, I have the impression
that one of the other unsung heroes in all those
changes was Bill Moore. Please add any
information or perception you have of Bill
Moore's interests and his role. Well, I just, my
knowledge of Bill's role is sideline knowledge.
not mainstream knowledge. But I do know that Bill,
and I've got to add, along with Mary Ann Parker,
was just so strong in expressing their views on the
need for A&M to open up as a coeducational school.
Bill Bill approached it from the standpoint of
the. Of the legitimate use of state resources. You
can't deny them on the basis of. This
discriminating on sex.
And. That was essentially Mary Ann Parker's view
also.
But Bill's main role, I think, was just as you
indicated, some other individual put his arm
around Earl and say, Earl, it's got to happen, old
boy. I can't keep the lid on the Senate anymore. And
of course, Bill was in such a strong position as
chairman of the Senate Finance Committee
that
he had to be listened to. How Earl responded to
that, I don't have the slightest idea. What do you
remember about any discussion or attitudes about
race? I don't remember much opposition to
integration. I don't think there was any. I don't
recall it if there was. When were you aware that
those first black students were going to enroll in
summer school that year? I didn't know that they
were going to. I certainly wasn't. Huh? I wasn't. I
wasn't aware, no. I understand that Mr. Rutter
called the Pentagon and
said when they send some regular Army enlisted
men, as they normally did to finish a degree at A&M,
to include some black students that summer. And
then he called Mr. Heaton in, I understand, and
said, Lloyd, you check their prerequisites. You
check their transcript and be sure they're in the
right section taking the right courses. But I and
my colleagues, we weren't aware that there were
going to be any black students in history courses
until the appropriate instructors got a call from
Mr. Eaton's office. I wasn't aware of it, which is,
I think, good.
Will you interview Charles McCandless? Yes, sir.
I already have. Did Charles tell you the story of
the Pinkerton detective? He mentioned it, but
Please, you tell it. Charles was closer to it than
I, but
during the 60s, when the SDS was on campus and
organizing the society chapter,
they began to make noises which, of course,
President Rutter detested.
And
he tried to do everything he could to put
roadblocks in their way.
Charles McCandless was the associate dean in
liberal arts for student relations programs. He
came to me one day and said, Dean Hubert, We have a
new student who is just not going to class.
All he's done practically is register, maybe
showing up in class once or twice, but he's not
going to school at all. What's his name? He gave me
his name. I says, call him in and give him a warning
and bust him out of here if he can't go to school.
I don't remember whether Charles. Called him in
and gave him the warning. Or whether Charles first
he must have done that. Because a few days later,
Charles got a call from the Coke building.
That that guy you're concerned about not going to
class. Don't worry about him. He's on a special
scholarship.
He is a Pinkerton detective from the Houston
Pinkerton Detective Office, and he's here
infiltrating the SDS group and reporting to
President Rudder. Did you have that information?
I don't think we did. Talk to Chuck on it. Oh, good.
Go back to Chuck and confirm that. Does anybody
know what the Pinkerton man discovered? I don't.
And I doubt if Chuck does. But he gave reports. How
frequently, I don't know. But he took... You're
mentioning McCandless. Go back to your beginning
months. Who were your key staff people in your
office? Describe them. Marie Franklo, the
secretary. Describe Ms. Franklo and come
forward. And... And Skipper Schlesinger.
Schleselman. Schleselman, the associate dean.
Shortly after I came on board, Skipper fell off of a
ladder while painting his house.
He was in his 60s then. Why he was up on a ladder, I
don't know. But nonetheless, he fell and broke a
leg, as I recall. And I had the dean's office for
months with just Marie Franklo and myself.
Mrs. Franklo was such a joy.
She felt that the dean's office,
wherever it was on campus, but that the dean's
office was the shining light on campus, and it had
to be above reproach in every way. For
example, a little later on, we were able to hire a
part-time clerk to help Mrs. Franklow during
Skipper's absence.
And the young lady
came to work the first day without any hose on. Mrs.
Franklow sent her home and says, you go get some
hose on. You're working in the dean's office now.
But she was She was very diplomatic with faculty,
just outstanding with them. She knew A&M and its
entire history, I think. She had good contacts
throughout the college with other of her
colleagues and others. And she had a good
communications linkage.
But she was a joy. And she
was a stickler for accurateness and
thoroughness. I remember one time I got a
memorandum. I've forgotten from which
department.
In which there were a couple of misspelled words.
She sent the memorandum in without any comment. I
quickly identified the misspelled words.
Encircled him. And I said, Miss Frank Lowe, send
this back to the department. And ask them to.
Revise the memorandum. And send it over in a
correct form.
Well, she was so pleased with that. She says,
that's grand. But
it was things like that that she thought was
important to the dean's office. Now, she was with
you for how many years? She was with me, Haskell.
She retired. I'm trying to recall now.
When the College of Liberal Arts was organized in
65, I'm trying
to remember what happened. I think it was about
that time that she retired. And then she is
followed by? She was followed by Peggy Ritchie.
Peggy had been in a number of locations on campus.
Peggy had a degree from Lamar and had
worked most recently for Bill Graff. Oh, gosh,
what a guy. Nonetheless, I asked her if she would
like to come over and join the new College of
Liberal Arts. She accepted and and was a mainstay
through liberal arts days and education too.
Competent, well
educated, good
solid record keeper, accurate, a stickler for
perfectionist perfection. And, yes, she was a
younger Marie Franklo, really.
College of Liberal Arts. I was amused. Well,
that's not the right word for it. I'm amused now
about it, but initially I was distraught.
I'm looking at my watch because I think shortly
after 11 I'll need to go in, Haskell. Okay, all
right. We're not far from the end of this tape.
Okay.
In 1970—no,
that's not it. In 1995,
the College of Liberal Arts celebrated its 25th
anniversary.